Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: cbnewsj!ecl
From: Jon A Webb <webb+@cmu.edu>
Subject: REVIEW: THE FIRM
Reply-To: Jon A Webb <webb+@cmu.edu>
Organization: School of Computer Science, CMU
Date: Thu, 8 Jul 1993 18:56:38 GMT
Approved: ecl@cbnewsj.att.com
Message-ID: <C9v0MG.Bps@cbnewsj.cb.att.com>
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies
Summary: r.a.m.r. #01987
Keywords: author=Webb
Sender: ecl@cbnewsj.cb.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Lines: 40

                                THE FIRM
                       A film review by Jon Webb
                        Copyright 1993 Jon Webb

     Tom Cruise plays a poor young man who has just graduated with the
highest honors from Harvard Law School. He is recruited by a Southern
law firm that gives him a high salary, a new house and car, etc. It
turns out that they are corrupt, and he has to find a way out.  He
can't just resign, since the last four people who tried that are dead.

     I thought the direction in this film was unfocussed.  E.g., the
scenes between Gene Hackman and Cruise's wife (whose name I can't
remember) are supposed to establish his sexual interest in her, but
don't.  Similarly the first scene between Cruise and David Strathairn
are supposed to convey Strathairn's desperation, but don't.  It's this
limpness of direction that makes "The Firm" boring at times and
generally mediocre.  For much of the movie, it is far easier to think
of funny endings for scenes or the movie in general (e.g., "It's the
right thing to do") than to concentrate on the somewhat convoluted
plot.

     Tom Cruise's acting, though, really brings the film along.  I
liked in particular his scene with the Mafia guys at the end.  It's
quite striking how he can take a part like this, which is not
demanding, really not much more than a cartoon-character young
ambitious lawyer, and make it really fun.

     The movie has several actors playing small but interesting roles.
Holly Hunter has been mentioned in other reviews as making her minor
part into something that will revive her career. I liked her very much
in her first scene, where she delivers a line that at simultaneously
establishes her stupidity and weirdness with deadpan seriousness. She's
also bouncing slightly through the whole film -- you get the feeling
that there's a lot more going on there than she's allowed to depict in
this film.

     David Strathairn also has a fine small part.  As always, it is a
thrill to watch him.  Gary Busey is also good in a small part.

-- J
