Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: cbnewsj!ecl
From: "David N. Butterworth" <butterworth@a1.mscf.upenn.edu>    
Subject: REVIEW: THE FIRM
Reply-To: "David N. Butterworth" <butterworth@a1.mscf.upenn.edu>
Organization: University of Pennsylvania
Date: Thu, 8 Jul 1993 18:55:09 GMT
Approved: ecl@cbnewsj.att.com
Message-ID: <C9v0K3.BnE@cbnewsj.cb.att.com>
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies
Summary: r.a.m.r. #01986
Keywords: author=Butterworth
Sender: ecl@cbnewsj.cb.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Lines: 98

                                 THE FIRM
                   A film review by David N. Butterworth
        Copyright 1993 David N. Butterworth/The Summer Pennsylvanian

     "I want the truth!" demands hotshot lawyer Tom Cruise in last
year's military drama, A FEW GOOD MEN.  And in his new film, THE FIRM,
Cruise once again plays a hotshot lawyer who's searching for the
truth.  Talk about a stretch!  Actually, Cruise's character Mitchell
McDeere stumbles upon the truth fairly quickly in the film.  But
unfortunately for him and THE FIRM, dealing with the unsavory aspects
of that truth produces more fizzle than sizzle.

     Okay.  So Tom's this red-hot Harvard Law School grad who, as the
film opens, is being courted by all these prestigious law firms.  But
Cruise's Mitch is astute and won't take any old offer.  He wants the
best.  He's got a mother in a trailer park and an estranged brother in
the county lockup so he's got something to prove.  And he wants to give
his adoring wife Abby (the cozy bathrobe-sporting Jeanne Tripplehorn)
more than a mere hand-to-mouth existence.  They are young, beautiful
people after all.  Surely they deserve better than that?

     So when the small but prosperous Memphis law firm Bendini, Lambert
& Locke make him an offer he can't refuse, well, he can't refuse it.

     So.  Mitch and Abby U-Haul it down to picture postcard-perfect
Tennessee where they're wined and dined by the Firm.  Their house is
beautiful; it's furnished, carries a low-interest mortgage, and even
has a Mercedes in the driveway.  But what's most important is that the
Firm doesn't forbid its lawyers' wives to work and "encourages
children."  "How *exactly* do they do that?" questions Abby, with
keen-eyed skepticism.

     As idyllic as home life should be, the workplace is tough as
hell.  Nobody's ever failed the bar exam Mitch is told once, twice, one
hundred times in a zany montage of mounting legal tomes and dwindling
desk space.  But before the film gets bogged down in legal
pen-pushing...  Bang!  There's an explosion aboard a yacht in the Grand
Caymans where two of the Firm's associates were vacationing.  Both
killed.  "That's four dead lawyers in under ten years," comments a total
stranger in a greasy spoon late one night.  One of the guys, played by
Ed Harris, has a bald head and thick-rimmed glasses and looks like a
Fed.  "Who are you guys?" asks Mitch, inquiringly, but they've ordered
their steak sandwiches *to go*!

     Before long, Mitch and his assigned mentor Avery Tolar (Gene
Hackman, who's name is inexplicably missing from the film's
advertisements) whip down to those treacherous, attorney-claiming
islands to bully a client.  Because Mitch is a hotshot lawyer, you know
it won't be long before he starts getting suspicious.  I mean, those
boxes of files in Avery's closet with the names of the dead lawyers on
them and stuff?  Something is definitely up.  But Mitch goes overboard
on the rum punches one night and partakes of one local delicacy too
many, so to speak.  Eight-by-ten glossies in a brown manila envelope to
follow.

     In the nation's capital, Agent Tarrance (Harris) pops up again and
we get the low-down on Mitch's employers.  (C'mon...  All that's
missing from the film's title is the word "unscrupulous.")  But what
the government needs is proof.  Incriminating evidence of the
documentary kind.  What they need is for some hotshot lawyer to make
photocopies and stuff so that they can put the whole lousy stinking
operation away for a long, long time.  Mitch says "No way!"  But he
sleeps on it and comes up with a scam involving $1.5 million, a Swiss
bank account, and the early release of his brother-the-convict.  Takes
a real hotshot to rip off the Federal Bureau of Investigation!

     THE FIRM is never boring (even at almost 2 hours and 40 minutes)
but it never really sparkles either.  Sure there's some tension, but
McDeere's plan to bring the Firm to its knees (which even his *wife*
doesn't want to hear about) isn't exactly awe-inspiring.  And the
denouement, which was changed from novelist John Grisham's original
ending, requires a humongous stretch of the imagination.

     The acting, much as you would expect from this cast, is uniformly
solid.  Gary Busey plays private eye Eddie Lomax who buys it with
style.  Blam!  Pow!  Holly Hunter plays his gum-chewing secretary Tammy
Hemphill who was under the table giving him a "pedicure."  David
Strathairn sensitively portrays Mitch's incarcerated brother, Ray.  Hal
Holbrook is the Firm's senior partner Oliver Lambert, and Wilford
Brimley its tough head of security who's "paid to be suspicious."

     Similarly, Sydney Pollack's direction is competent and
workmanlike.  The script, adapted from Grisham's bestseller, was pulled
together by David Rabe, Robert Towne (who wrote CHINATOWN), and David
Rayfiel.  But the feeling you get from all their efforts is just one
more humdrum movie-going experience.

     If the thought of another Tom Cruise hotshot still turns you on,
then THE FIRM is definitely for you.  But if you're more interested in
a slick, engrossing tale of corporate corruption, read the hardcopy
version instead.


+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Directed by: Sydney Pollack       David N. Butterworth - UNIVERSITY OF PA |
| Rating (Maltin Scale): **         Internet: butterworth@a1.mscf.upenn.edu |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+

